Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) combines information retrieval with language model generation. Instead of relying only on parametric knowledge stored in model weights, RAG fetches relevant documents at query time. This lets the model ground its answers in external, up-to-date sources.

The retrieval step embeds both the query and documents into a shared vector space. Nearest neighbor search then finds the most semantically similar chunks. These retrieved chunks are passed as context to the generator.

Chunking strategy has a large impact on retrieval quality. Fixed chunking splits text at regular character intervals regardless of meaning. Recursive chunking splits on paragraph, sentence, and word boundaries hierarchically. Semantic chunking uses embedding similarity to detect topic shifts.

BM25 is a sparse retrieval algorithm based on term frequency and inverse document frequency. It scores documents by how many query terms appear, weighted by rarity. BM25 excels at exact keyword matches and short queries with specific entities.

Dense retrieval uses neural embeddings to capture semantic meaning. Unlike BM25, dense retrievers can match paraphrases and synonyms that share no surface words. Popular dense models include BGE, E5, and Instructor embeddings.

Hybrid retrieval combines sparse and dense methods. Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) merges ranked lists from BM25 and vector search by summing reciprocal ranks. Hybrid consistently beats either method alone on diverse query types.

Rerankers refine an initial retrieval result. Cross-encoders score query-document pairs jointly and produce much higher precision than bi-encoders, at the cost of latency. Rerankers are typically applied to the top 50-100 candidates from the retriever.

Evaluation metrics for retrieval include recall@k, precision@k, MRR, and nDCG. Recall@k measures whether the correct document appears in the top k results. MRR captures how high the first relevant result ranks on average.

Faithfulness measures whether generated answers are supported by the retrieved context. A high-faithfulness answer contains no claims that go beyond what the context states. Hallucination detection typically compares answer spans against retrieved chunks.

FAISS is a library for efficient similarity search on dense vectors. It supports flat (exact) indexes for small corpora and approximate indexes like IVF and HNSW for larger scales. HNSW trades a small recall drop for large speed gains.
"@